Hello, everybody. Welcome to a new episode of the
Decent. I'm your host, as always Ricardo Ops. And
today I'm joined by Doctor Isabella Sarto Jackson. She
is lecturer in Cognitive Science at the University of
Vienna, guest lecturer in Cognitive Biology at the University
of Bratislava, Executive Manager of the Conrad Lawrence Institute
for Evolution and Cognition Research and president of the
Austrian Neuroscience Association. And today we're focusing on her
great book, The Making and Breaking of Minds, How
social interaction shaped the human mind. So, Doctor Sarto
Jackson, welcome to the show. It's an immense pleasure
to everyone.
Thank you very much Ricardo for having me. It's
a great pleasure to, to share my insights with
you and uh hopefully everybody who's going to listen
to this podcast.
Thank you. So, I mean, we have lots of
ground to cover here because there are many, many
things associated with how we approach the study of
the human mind, human psychology. But let's start perhaps
with uh DNA because as I read in your
book, that's also one of the places you primarily
came from and actually have already had many interviews
with, for example, behavior geneticists on the show. And
so, uh, particularly about these sort of nature versus
nurture debate and the focus that sometimes we have
on DNA or, mm, much of the time indeed
we have on DNA. Do genes really hold precise
instructions to create a being with all its, in
this particular case, psychological traits.
Mhm. Yeah. Thank you very much. Um, VERY important
question. And, um, this is something that, as you
already said, um, this, uh I, I started as
a geneticist, my master was in gen in genetics
in his genetics actually. And this is uh something
I've been thinking about a lot. And uh actually,
um the beginning of my book um is dealing
exactly with that topic. So, um one of the
things that I would like to start with is
that um I have very strong doubts about this
strict gene deterministic way because it's very simplified. Uh
AND it's especially unhelpful if we talk about the
human brain or cognitive processes because there we have
so many causal factors that underlie the organism and
the human mind. So this nature nurtured dichotomy is
actually to my mind, some sort of obfuscation which
has its historical roots in going back to the
17th century. Um IT frames nature in this very
simplistic way we look at um the DNA as
if it holds the alive information. Um And on
the other hand, you have this environment which is
completely separate from the organism. And as we know,
now this is much more intertwined. So there is
a dynamic interplay between genes and environment and this
interplay is mediated by the organism actually with its
active involvement. So importantly, I would say there is
like reciprocal interaction between organism and environment. And from
that point of view, it doesn't make sense to
s uh artificially separate bio, biological and environmental factors
historically, that might have had benefits to study um
certain aspects. But I think it's time to overcome
this dichotomy.
Mhm. But I, I mean, just to be fair
here, do you think that at least most behavior,
geneticists are really genetic determinist because, I mean, at
least with most people I talk with on the
show, uh, I, I guess that all of them
acknowledge the role of the, the, the role of
the environment. Of course, they talk about heritability about
twin study. Some of them put a little bit
more emphasis on genes, some of them a little
bit more emphasis on the environment. It also depends
on the traits we're talking about. Right. But, II,
I mean, uh, do you agree that perhaps, uh,
be more, at least most behavior geneticists do not
tend to be, uh, genetic determines
neither. II, I definitely agree because we've come a
long way since. And of course, um, it was
the geneticist who kind of disentangled a lot of
factors and saw that there was a lot, uh
missing in the picture. However, historically, keep in mind
that it was um this, this uh behavioral genetics
was always seen like a one way street. So
you had the genes that were kind of in
control. And uh on the other hand, um you
had uh environment separated. Um WHEN we look at
it, I think now, um then we have to
acknowledge that there are at least three contributing factor
that shape behavior. We have the variability that's within
the gene in the genes in in the genome.
Then we have a variability depending on environment, social
environment, cultural environment. And then we have the variability
in the phenotypic trait. And this and here, II,
I fully agree by now, most acknowledge that phenotypic
traits are polygenic and multifactorial. Um Yeah. So, so
maybe one more thing is that uh one has
to be very careful when thinking about um genes
as they call that the most important factors that
um very often one also implies some sort of
causality. And that is misleading because uh to disentangle
um causality based on the genome versus the environment,
that's quite um a task that requires uh much
more than just looking at the, the um at,
at the underlying uh genetic sequences. Mhm A
and of course, throughout our conversation, we're going to
get into each of the specific factors that play
a role in our uh in the development of
our psychology. I mean, it's genes of course, but
it's also gene expression. And apart from genetics. Again,
we have the environment, we have the social context
we have culture, we have, by the way, not
just the brain but also the rest of the
body. I guess we're going to talk about that
as well. But ju just before we move on
to this idea that you explain in the book
of thinking about genetic susceptibility instead of genetic determinism
just before we get into that. So what do
can we make of, for example, uh twin studies
and adoption studies? Because I mean, even though genes
of course, are not the entire picture here, they
still play some role. So what do you think?
What would you say is perhaps the informa the
useful information we can get from the twin and
adoption?
Yeah. So, um again, um in the light of
um the history of how these studies have been
um conceptualized and performed, they were really important in
trying to disentangle uh nature versus nurture. Um ESPECIALLY
because uh most of the traditional studies like uh
pedigree analysis or genealogical methods, they um always assumed
um that there was a bimodal distribution of in
of traits within the population. Now with uh twin
studies, um it was easier to um find um
a good me or to have a good method
at hand uh to appraise uh the hereditary environmental
problem with respect to non bimodal characteristics, at least
in theory. Um However, again, here we have the
problem that also twin studies are phenotypic correlation studies.
So, again, underlying causalities cannot be deducted from that.
Um And um maybe the other thing that uh
also have to has to be kept in mind
is that um we have to um also think
uh about when, when doing these um association studies
is uh to make sure uh that we control
for confounding factors. And although twin studies of course,
give a much better handle to study uh this,
this uh uh uh the, the, the um entanglement
between or to disentangle um environment and, and um
and biology. Um WE should not forget that um
also in twins, there is can be a lot
of underlying confounding factors and they also have to
be uh they, they're very often neglected. Um I'm
aware that this has come a long way and
of course, um it's a lot more um it's
uh there is much more evidence now um for
what you can study and what, what uh what
points cannot be elucidated. Um Yeah. So importantly, maybe
just as a final sentence is one of the
most important recent outcomes from neurobiology is that even
in twin studies, it has been shown that the
anatomy of the brain varies relatively significantly. So, um
there are some areas where it's perfect where we
have perfect correlation with other areas. But there is
some significant variation even between um Moocs psychotic twins
that have exactly the same genome.
Mhm A and that of course, has to do.
I would imagine when it comes to, for example,
neonates with the fact that during brain development in
the uterus, there are many stochastic events that play
a role that we can't really entirely predict and
that are not predictable just by genes themselves. That's
just one example. Right, then we also have levels
of hormones and the ways by which perhaps uh
neurons establish connections with one another that have to
do with many different factors that are not entirely
written in the genes neither. So there are many
things like that that could lead even uh immediately
after birth to two identical twins already having from
the outset slightly different uh brains. And then of
course, as they grow older as they have their
unique life experiences and we're going to get into
that later, of course, their brains become even more
dissimilar. But those are some of the factors that
play a role there. Right.
Exactly. So, exactly what you're saying. So there is
already a quite a significant degree of randomness um
because the amount of genes that we have um
even in considering all the splice variants and so
on, they can never. Um So we're talking about
maybe 22,000 genes. Um THEY can never um and
program or give an exact blueprint of the connections
of uh 86 billion neurons, let alone uh 10
to the power of 15 synaptic connections. So that
would not be possible.
Uh, AND so, uh, I mean, what would genetic
susceptibility mean here in the, in this particular context
if we are rejecting the idea of genetic, uh,
genetic determinism, which I think most people nowadays reject,
uh, what would it mean to say that perhaps,
uh, there are some genetic susceptibility to developing certain
particular traits?
Mhm. Yeah, that's, that's a very interesting question. And,
um, um, I just want to point out that
although I use susceptibility myself very often, uh when
it comes to development, I actually prefer um thinking
about potentiality, thinking about what, what's, what is the
underlying uh potential that the genes give us. So,
whereas susceptibility has always this negative connotation that is
related to sensitivity like being predisposed to, for a
drug or, or um to, to a disease or
something. So, so what is the susceptibility? This is
kind of um a potential that is written in
our genome um that allows us to unfold uh
certain traits. Um But this very much depends on
uh stimuli from the outside and that can be
um the ecological environment, the social environment, there can
be um factors that come even from just from
the internal environment, like positional information, depending you know,
which place within the organism certain cells have. So
basically, as I see it is we have uh
a huge potential that's written in our genome and
whether it's realized or not depends on very many
factors and to be honest, there is many, many
more um uh information, let's say passive information um
that is never realized because we just haven't got
the environment for it. Um I like to call
it um a colleague of mine used to call
it and I have taken that that phrase because
I like it so much. Um That's uh Darwin's
hit the ink, you know, he's written, it's written
but in a yet invisible way and only being
exposed to certain stimuli to certain environmental factors, then
the potential unfolds.
Mhm A and when it comes to the environment
itself, I mean, how easy or hard is it
to study the impact of specific environmental factors on
human psychology and development? I mean, because of course,
there's a myriad of things happening around us at
the same time and some of them might influences,
some others do not influence us. But I, I
mean, uh uh how is your heart? Is it
for us to really be able to know what
aspects of the environment have an impact on human
psychology?
Well, yeah, that's a great question. And um here,
I would like to draw a parallel to um
to, to genome studies actually, when genome studies were
set out, um originally, most of these studies were
dedicated to uh investigate individual genes. Like I remember
myself, I've been involved in projects where we knocked
out individual genes in um in his strains. So
uh and then only with the advent of um
different better methodologies and um more uh uh encompassing
um techniques like than um the, the um genome
wide studies there. Um You got a different handle
on looking uh Ooo on many factors of many
genes at the same time. Now, in parallel, when
we now consider um the the environment, we, we're
kind of uh almost at the beginning. I no,
not quite, but there is much. So we're lagging
behind, we only took now the environment into the
consideration. However, a lot has already been done um
with studies coming from the expos. So what's interesting
there is you take a lot of different factors,
external factors that might be global factors or external
factors, that might be very specific or internal factors
and all these factors together uh might give you
a more complete picture if you combine that with
uh genome wide association studies. And moreover, and that
must not be forgotten, you take all this information,
all this data. Um BUT you have to also
follow the developmental trajectory because this is what makes
the picture complete. So rather than taking a snapshot,
look at the different stages of the ontogeny and
there you get a more complete picture. So we
do have quite a few techniques in our hands
that will help us. But I think we're still
quite at the beginning.
Mhm And then there's also this phenomenon of organism,
environment interactions, right? It's not that uh even though
I if we are considering the environment and how
it influences psychology, it's not that we are just
passive risk chapters of environmental influences. I mean, there's
also a sort of dynamic interplay between the organism
and the environment. And we are, we are like
active agents also playing a role and to some
extent, shaping our own environment, right?
Actually, uh Ricardo, if I may, you've already said
the most important things that to my mind is.
So um there is not only this reciprocal interaction,
but it is the organism that influences its own
uh environment to make it uh the organism himself
herself more are adapted to its niche. Um And
especially when we talk about humans and our cognitive
capacities, we are the paradigmatic niche constructors. So we
are able to change our environment that it kind
of very well suits us. And that has been
done for, for um our e en en entire
evolutionary trajectory and we've be, and it's getting faster
and faster now that might have bring different problems,
however, but this is something so as you already
said, so you've pointed out the most important uh
points already. Um Yeah. So, so, II I think
uh it, it, it maybe one thing is when
we take or we look at other um species,
for example, then you can see that there um
the the environment has a plethora of different effects.
So think about temperature, uh dependent sex determination in
some organisms or population density dependent sex determination, others
or um predator induced um poly is um so
all these things that have very specific outcomes that
are studied in o other species uh in humans,
we've got so many factors that can influence us
uh on top of our very long uh development,
childhood and adolescence development. Um So the, the all
these um selective forces that can shape us um
have a long, long time to, to take its
effect.
Uh And I mean, we were talking about genes
just a minute ago and even when it comes
to genetic evolution, I mean, now we have a
broader framework of gene culture co evolution, right? And
it's not just genetic evolution itself occurring, but we
also have culture and culture itself might also influence
how genetic evolution unfolds. And also the other way
around. I mean, genetic evolution might also influence how
I mean, how our culture develops or how attuned
we are to certain aspects in our culture or
the kinds of culture that we have in comparison
to, for example, uh other cultural animals and so
on. So we even there, there's all, there's also
the sort of interplay between genes and the cultural
environment, I
guess. Yep. Yeah, you, you're absolutely right. So there
is of course some classic examples of that what
you've just mentioned like um when um our ancestors
starting to um uh keep animals and uh used
the milk. So we have uh this shift in
our um our our ancestors had this shift in
uh lactose tolerance um in humans. So we have
so many cultural processes that speed up or maybe
even take over evolutionary uh pro natural evolutionary, natural
selection, uh biological evolutionary processes. And a colleague or
colleagues of mine have recently shown that um because
of medical interventions like um performing cesarean sections, um
the evolutionary pressure that um is forced the human
skull of a newborn to remain relatively small because
it had to fit through the birth channel. This
pressure has been relieved now because of our medical
interventions. So we really, with our cultural evolutionary processes,
we speed up um selection processes.
Mhm A And by the way, I would like
to get into this notion of neuroplasticity because uh
I, I mean, there was a period, I guess
that back in the early two thousands where we
really had a very big hype surrounding neuroplasticity and
that is sort of, but it in that it
was going to explain everything out there. But ii
I mean, now we are perhaps to tune it
down a little bit and, and I would like
to ask you so, neuroplasticity, what is really the
role it plays in the brain and brain development
and what are its limits?
Mhm OK. Yeah. So, neuroplasticity, this is a um
a very exciting topic. Um So we have actually
did the concept is is more than 100 years
old. Santiago Ra Moni joal was um probably the
first one, was the first one who described it.
But then he kind of because it was not
um well accepted um by his colleagues. So he
kind of um reduced it to the assumption that
it only happens very, very early and and then
the brain is no longer available. However, what we
know now is that um there is a huge
flexibility and neuroplasticity. So a functional and a structural
neuroplasticity, especially in the human brain. What is, what
is this plasticity? Actually? This is, and this, this
is like a a reorganization um that um helps
our brains to adjust themselves within um an organism's
lifespan and that helps to adjust or to adapt
to the environmental experiences. Now looking at it from
an evil evil. So evolutionary developmental perspective, it's actually
neuroplasticity is just kind of an exploratory mechanism like
um we have uh similar forms um in um
in, in other uh organisms. Um So, what does
this mean? So you have um you have me
mechanisms that um perform environmental sampling and um so
they sample the environment and um get reinforced when
a certain aspect of the phenotype is um has
a positive uh receives a positive stimulus. So a
positive uh feedback. So, um and so, so as
I said, this is actually uh an evil concept
and in the brain you can see it and
it has been studied very thoroughly because it's so,
so obvious that we have this high abundance of
um neuron uh uh connections. So the synaptic connections
in the first. So when we spoke, I, I'm
sticking now with humans in the first two years
of age. So we have this excess of synapses.
And then um what happens then is you get
uh pruning that depends on the external stimuli. So
where is that the, the um the exuberant growth
of the synaptic connections? This is largely genetically driven
and also randomly um uh um fostered. But then
what is actually stabilized, which of the synapses remain
and which um get lost or, or um or
are eliminated? Very much depends on environmental stimuli coming
up uh coming from the from, from the social
and the physical environment, cultural environment as well. So
you have to use it or lose it principle.
Um So we have some peaks as a childhood.
There is another one in um in adolescence that
that's more of a recent finding. So we have
a two really large peaks of rearrangement in the
brain. Now, this is a huge potential again. Um
There is cases I've written about some of them
in my book cases where the brain really completely
reorganizes itself. For example, cases of uh hemispherectomy where
half of the brain. So one hemisphere has been
surgically removed because of uh uh a severe illness.
And uh this person almost fully recovered so could
walk again, could speak again. Uh YOU made a
college degree. So um the functional half of the
brain took over the missing the function of the
missing half of the brain. So it's a huge
potential. However, and here I agree with you, there
has been a huge hype and not everything has
been fulfilled. What, what was hoped for? So there
are limitations and what are the limitations? First of
all, it's age that this probably the biggest thing.
So the younger you are, the more malleable the
brain is of course. Um Second thing uh has
also to do with the brain region we're talking
about. So, um what is some regions? Uh YOU
can see that in um in, in uh where,
for example, there is a lot of neurogenesis going
on hippocampus areas, a dag gyros or factory bulb
uh maybe also in the cerebellum, they have a
high um capacity of neuroplasticity. Uh Whereas in other
regions and we see that in patients that suffer
from strokes, um other regions might be much more
uh difficult uh to uh that there is some
new cortic mapping going on. So, so that's another
thing, what else? Um THINGS like neurotoxicity. So if
you do damage to your own brain, for example,
by alcohol or your mother did by drinking alcohol
while you were a fetus. So again, there you,
you kind of interfere and that are another really
fascinating thing what has been shown is that um
stress level, the amount of uh cortisol um interfere.
So it is an antagonistic to um neuroplasticity. And
last, but not least, of course, all sorts of
um neurodegenerative diseases are kind of um uh that,
that the inhibit or interfere with neuroplasticity. I'm sure
there's many more other limits. But these, these are
now on the top of my head.
So in the history of neuroscience, there have been
two very dominant ideas. One of them perhaps is
more recent is more from, I guess the seventies
eighties somewhere like that. But I mean, the first
one is localization is that is the idea that
there would be a 1 to 1 mapping of
brain areas and particular functional traits, including character traits
that I think is the, the one are the
ones that we are mostly interested in here because
we are talking about uh human psychology and uh
people's uh traits and so on. Uh I I
mean, and then the other one is modularity of
mind slash brain. And perhaps to some extent they
might be, I guess we could say a little
bit related because if we can, if we can
find that certain functions are exclusive to certain particular
brain areas, then the idea of modularity is just
saying that OK, so we have different modules across
the brain that have evolved separately to serve certain
functions. Perhaps the main argument here would be to
serve certain evolved functions related to survival, reproduction and
so on it. I I mean, how do you
look at, at these ideas? Do you think that
they are still very dominant in neuroscience? Is there
still some support to them or not so much?
Well, that's certainly interesting because um first of all,
let me be a little bit provocative. Um BECAUSE
IIIM, my argument is that the localization list view
um is actually uh rooted in the legacy of
phrenology. I don't know if you can see. Um
Y yes, I, I was actually already noticing
it. So, so um of course, this is just
provocative. Um And um we've come a long way
since. Um SO this still this, this thinking of
that you have different um areas that are um
distinct, um different traits can be mapped to very
um um distinct brain areas. Um And that even
goes for character trait, personality traits. So this is
um this is something that, that uh is to
my mind largely overblown. However, however, uh when we
look at the gross anatomy of the brain, then
the localization list view is not wrong, right? Because
I mean, we know from uh from studies uh
that individual case studies um like that there is
a relatively high reliability, not 100% never, but some
areas that is so, so otherwise this whole brain
maps of the brain atlas that that's now has
been established by the huge flagship ship EU project
wouldn't make sense. So there is to a good
degree there is localization, especially when we talk about
the soma motor cortex or somatosensory cortex and so
on that, like defined by Wilder Penfield. So there
is um I I'm not disputing that however, an
ex extreme localization list uh view of functions is
almost certainly wrong because this would go completely against
neuroplasticity. And actually, including while the Penfield already like
more than uh I don't know, 70 years ago,
he already saw that there are some overlapping zones
and this is not like a clear cut module
now. Um And another thing that would also kind
of argue against it, not only the neuroplastic um
uh uh argument, I've just broadened, which we touched
upon previously. Also, um you can have brain damage
in different, in, in different patients at the same
position and they have very different symptoms. So also
that would argue against it. Now, um what makes
the real big difference is uh of course, the
um micro anatomy, how the synaptic connections are then
established as we've already seen uh in terms of
dis use it or lose it. Now, in answer
to your question, how does it relate to brain
modules? Well, one thing that comes to my mind
is that in, in case of um evolutionary psychology
and um and this uh view of, of um
very clear cut uh brain modules, then there's always
this debate that a lot of it is innate,
if not all you develop. Um Of course, you
develop, you're not born with it, you develop it.
But if you develop it, that comes due to
do some input from the environment, but it's still
always the module will be uh roughly at the
same time. Or however, there is also a different
uh interpretation. Um COMING from the sparseness concept, it
might not even be anatomically exactly the same position.
But yet you have like a sparse network that
always kind of gives you a module. Now, this
is much more difficult to disprove um what I
can as to my mind from, from uh w
what WW what uh I I see um coming
from the Neurosciences is that yes, there is modularity.
Yes, gross anatomy is relatively reliable. You can do
these brain maps. Um However, this massive modularity hypothesis
that with these highly specialized models like uh Swiss
army knife that is to my mind uh has
the most neuroscientists have moved away from that. So,
yeah, that, that's my take on that.
Uh Also uh one of the reasons why I
wanted to ask you about that actually. And you
mentioned evolutionary psychology there and yes, massive modularity of
the human mind is and a big idea in
evolutionary psychology, specifically, not, not exclusively, I guess, but
yes, specifically there uh it, but since we talked
about genes at the beginning of our conversation, sometimes
it seems to me that uh not just the
modularity of mind idea, but also some of these
localization is thinking as some parallels with gene centric
views of psychology in the way, in a way
that I mean, sometimes you hear evolutionary psychologists, for
example, claim that they uh the neonate brain sort
of harbors innate cognitive modules that come equipped with
contents that are specified in the genetic makeup. I
mean, something along those lines, right? And so uh
we would have ii I think that the term,
the correct term here would be information processing mechanisms
that are innate and that are again specified in
the genetic makeup. And uh and that are associated
with these or that different kind of brain or
mind module. So, uh I, I guess that this
is the idea but, but basically, what I'm asking
you here is if you agree that uh this
sort of modularity localization is idea sometimes links to
gene centric views of human psychology.
Definitely, I, I very much appreciate this point um
with that, that you highlight that actually, I, I
see it in a very similar light. So um
there is this kind of idea of um innateness
that has a little bit of a touch of
prema formation is so that you have already all
the information is already there and you just need
to unfold it, you know, but it, it is
already there. And um II I think uh I
mean, the the truth is always probably somewhere in
the middle, it's not completely wrong. Of course, I
mean, there is good evidence also for some of
these claims. However, as I see, it is um
you, you have these predispositions coming from genes um
and they give uh some kind of a kickstart,
they give you uh a guiding um expression and
then it is the development. So uh that uh
that, so that or let me say, say like
this, that um you have a predisposition and that
provides then a substrate for the developmental processes to
operate. So, and I think this is where it
comes from. It is not completely wrong. But um
yeah, and, and I agree on the parallel which
you pointed out. So II, I think yes, this
innateness concept has smacks very much of pre formation
is,
yeah. And I, and I mean, I don't know
if you agree with this point specifically, but I
guess that you use the word predisposition there instead
of thinking about in terms of innateness, I guess.
And I, I would imagine that, yeah, there's, I
think good evidence that perhaps we are born with
some predispositions to, for example, pay attention to certain
information in our environment, particularly the social environment. For
example, I don't know, look at people's faces and
try to gather information from them. And perhaps some
aspects of language might also be predisposition and stuff
like that. Uh But then perhaps the idea that's
wrong here is to think that uh those predispositions
are like uh fixed and the underlying informational processing,
mech information processing mechanisms cannot be changed at all
or are impermeable to culture and to all kinds
of environment inputs. I mean, does this ring through
or?
Yeah, that definitely. So you you touched upon a
really, really important point here because what's completely left
out in the whole debate um about modernity is
um the the concept of the idea of acceptation
and especially the human mind with all our cultural
evolution, we have um a lot of what, what
our brain does, what the human mind does is
falls in the domain of acceptation. So what is
that? So we have certain brain regions maybe um
that have evolved for some specific adapt adaptive purposes.
But then they have been report purposed hijacked. You
mentioned the example of um attention focusing, visually focusing.
Um I think social stimuli and so on. Now,
obviously, our visual senses are very good. Now, um
our culture has evolved to uh that we, we
use writing and would be we're able to, to
read and write. So most certainly don't have an
innate mo module for learning to read. So this
is an acceptation. So this was most likely uh
a region that has been adapted to uh uh
uh uh um pattern recognition, pattern completion and that
has then been used for different purpose for reading.
Yeah. And that doesn't sit well with evolutionary uh
with, with um the massive modernity hypothesis. Definitely.
Mhm And so one topic that I would like
to get into now is of course, when it
comes to human psychology, at least in our modern
societies, uh we also have a medical approach to
it and we, and we use terms like uh
normal development, normal psychology. We, we, we, we use
terms like mental disorder, mental condition and a mental
disease and something and stuff like that. So, uh
do, do you think, I mean, when it comes
to thinking about what normal might mean in the
context of uh developmental psychology, what do you think
are perhaps some of the issues with that, with,
with thinking that there's a normal way for human
psychology to develop. And if uh a person, for
example, somewhat deviates from that normal pathway, then there
must be something wrong with them.
Yeah, this is again, a very, very important question
and topic. You, you, you, you, you're uh pointing
out. So um to my mind and I've, I've
written uh about it. Um THIS idea of normal
has its roots in mechanistic thinking. So we see
and that again, go goes back, I always kind
of uh see a little bit of the historical
components. Yeah. Uh THAT goes back even to, to
Rene de K and um who saw the body
as, as like the mindless machine, you know, and
um in this view, we have a view, uh
we have a conception of a healthy body like
a machine that runs error free. This is not
only a huge simplification, let alone that, but it
has also other consequences. First of all, um it
assumes that there is something that is fixable, there
is something that must be a standard uh uh
a way how it should work, um an optimal
way how it should work. And if we fix
that, just, you know, turn on this um screw
or, or, or change this little button, then we
can um we can all of a sudden uh
put the person back into being normal again, re
establishing normalcy. That has a lot to do. Also
with how the current um psychopharmacology, uh pharmacology in
general looks at the brain, you know that there's
something out of balance, you change something, you turn
some wheel and all of a sudden you imbalance
against this is this has problematic consequences. It also
has societal consequences. We might want to speak about
that. And last, but not least is it makes
us really overconfident because we can capture the complexity
of a machine. So we might think, oh yeah,
we might be able, you know, to have pumps
like pumps blood like an old pump. So we
must be able to fix that and we completely
neglect um these multi scale properties and systemic properties
um which might, you know, have even and I'm
touching on a very hot topic here, which might
not be true, but we might even be talking
about bottom up and top down causation. So, so
um all these things which you will never find
in a machine.
So, uh I mean, about this medical context and
how we think about psychopathology, there are many things
we could talk about here. I mean, just when
it comes to simple classification and the DS M
for example, um in 2022 I had an entire
interview with Doctor Ellen Oritz and we got into
the huge mess that is the history of the
DS M. The classification of mental disorders changed drastically
over the decades for reasons that have sometimes very
little to do with science. So that's already a
problem in and of itself. But uh I would
like to ask you about the specific, very interesting
thing that I read about in your book that
is Looping Effects. And I'm, I'm, and I'm going
to uh quote you here. This is basically how
the verbal discourse about certain psychopathological or psychological phenomena
impacts on how this very phenomenon is framed theorized
experience and treated. So, I mean, it seems that
also the way we uh theorize and classify disorders
and study them itself might have an effect on
how we think about them and then reinforce, I
guess, I guess, to some extent uh their own
uh existence.
Yep. So, yeah, you, you, you uh summarized it
very nicely. The concept actually comes from Ian hacking.
And um this is uh I think it's important
because it is um a uh a way of
looking at um pathologies, especially psychopathologies uh in a
way that may be able to bridge the normative
and the naturalist conceptions. So, um what's at stake
here? So if this is true, if this loop
looping uh effects exist, um and we classify doctors,
psychologists, psychiatrists classify people in a certain way, then
people may conform to the way how this pathology
is described. So it opens up a space that
they can um express symptoms in a socially accepted
way. And at the same time, it has this
kind of um components that it might lead to
um a self fulfilling prophecy because this is the
way how you expect to behave or the symptoms
you expect to um to, to express. So, yeah,
this is um I found it interesting in uh
relation to uh studies how Children when they were
maltreated again over history. What happened? Uh It gives
um it, it almost uh absorbs uh uh the
parents from their responsibilities when you look at a
pathology and then you will say, yeah, but um
can't do anything about it. And this is how
the the child is like this and the child
will act out in this way. So um Ian
hacking actually used a sync uh a DH D
as a modern day, a contemporary example of the
looping effect. So, you know, uh and interestingly um
might be very much depending on, on cultural inputs,
what do you expect from how a person behaves?
And another example is of course, uh hysteria that,
that um disappeared in fro from, from uh from
the, the DS M for example. Um So, so
yeah, I, I think um this looping effect has
a lot of potential to um explain why some
of the pathologies um come and go and why
some of these pathologies express symptoms of patients with
these pathologies express certain symptoms at a certain given
time in history and then they don't anymore. So
it has something to do with the social acceptance.
A and also there are very particular examples, some
of their very unfortunate historical examples like the case
of homosexuality, right? Which in not very long ago,
it was considered a mental disorder. And I mean,
with scientific progress and with people who were themselves
almost sexual, expressing their own views and social movements
and all of that, I mean, it has been
fortunately normalized across many societies, not everywhere, unfortunately, but
across many societies and it's no longer considered the
medical condition. But I I mean, it, it, that's,
that's I guess a very clear example of something
that was medicalized, considered an anomaly just on a
cultural normative and moral grounds, basically because people uh
to put it in the simplest terms, possible, didn't
like that kind of behavior.
Right. Exactly. So th this is here, you, you
pointed out this is uh there was this very,
very strong normative component to it and um that
there is always a walk on the tightrope um
about um s to patho pathologize symptoms versus to
help people. So obviously, you want to uh help
people. Uh But in some cases, um there is
no, no help required as in case of homosexuality,
this is was a purely normative um uh decision.
And uh here uh you pathologize um a normal
variation within the human population. Mhm
Yeah. A and so, uh I, I mean, at
a certain point there, you also mentioned when we
were talking about how we think about normalcy, uh
the fact that uh nowadays it seems that we
are uh like bio biologs. I mean, relying much
on the biological aspect of things when thinking about
certain disorders. I mean, trying to find specific genes,
specific brain regions that might be malfunctioning and that
would explain, I don't know, depression, anxiety, schizophrenia and
all of that. But I, I mean, shouldn't we
have moved already past the simple biological or re
reductionist way of looking at things? I mean, shouldn't
uh don't we have at this time already a
bio psychosocial model of, of human psychology and also
I guess adding to that uh an individual's own
history to consider.
Yeah. Um I see your point. However, what is
extremely tempting about this. Um And I'm uh uh
I, I also think it's, it's largely reductionist, but
it does not necessarily have to be reductionist if,
if you stay looking just at the biological parameters.
But the exciting and interesting thing about doing that
and focusing on the biological parameters is that the
um they are quantifiable, they are measurable. And this
is something that conveys objectivity. This is much easier
to sell to work with than our messy environments
where you were, where you take other theories that
draw from seemingly soft sciences that have qualitative approaches
and so on. So this is what we still,
in some cases, rely on some on, on uh
Christopher Bo's biostatistical theory. Although especially with psychopathologies, there
is hardly any um objective parameter that we can
specify um in terms of what is normal in
a given uh population versus where is, where is
a deviation that leads to these and uh those
uh symptoms of uh pathologies. So I, I think
that the appeal is simply because it's measurable and
we have techniques that can be exploited for that.
Yeah.
Mhm. Uh So do you think that when it
comes to understanding how psychological traits work, how they
develop through time that perhaps a framework like dynamical
systems theory would apply here and would be perhaps
a more uh closer to the reality of human
psychology than some other, let's say reductionist views out
there, like trying to biolog or reduce everything to
simple biological factors like genes, hormones, neurotransmitters, brain networks
and, and stuff like that.
Mhm. Yep. That's a very good point. Um And
again, I agree. Um So I think we're thinking
along similar lines. Um We don't, we, we don't
have a strong controversy yet. So II, I do
agree. Um I think actually it would be very
helpful to shift towards um complex system theory because
with all the reductionist approaches, we're completely letting uh
uh setting aside um the relations among these different
complexes and components in the complex and disregard sort
of systemic qualities. And um yeah, so this is,
this is a really important point. Um However, um
there, these are, you know, you, you, you harvest
usually the low hanging fruits first. So I think
we're getting there, the field is moving. But um
there is still i it's funding is still, there
is still a lot of funding and, and still
a lot of money in uh using the more
traditional approaches and some of them still may have
merits. Um Yeah, but, but I think the next
big lipo step has to be to look uh
look at the organism from a systemic view point
of view. I agree.
And of course, I guess that in this case,
this is not at all to say that uh
things like genes or hormones or neurotransmitters do not
matter at all. I mean, they, they play, they
certainly play their role. It's just the fact that
perhaps we have to think about our psychology as
more of a dynamic system and the rates as
not really uh fixed things that uh that uh
change and fluctuate over time in this or that
direction uh and the same, I guess would apply
to mental disorders.
Right. Yeah, I agree. And just um going back
to something I said earlier, um with respect to
the expose on when we look at um genome
wide association studies related to the expos on to
expos studies, then it would be really important to
look at all the developmental components that are involved
and the whole trajectory of the development. So, uh
as you rightly said, um it's not uh you
know, it's not fix, but um Conran Waddington called
it homo races. So, rather than having um the
concept of just homeostasis with a set point where
you, where the organism goes back to a set,
it is the, the trajectory that is followed, not
an individual set point.
Conrad Weddington uh is the one also related to
the idea of the epigenetic landscape.
Absolutely. Right.
Yeah. And so uh another thing that perhaps nowadays
upsets many people, but I guess that we should
also mention this when it comes to environment and
social relations. Isn't it also important to consider here?
Things like socio-economic structures, systemic discrimination based on gender,
race or any other kind of social category and
other sorts of social uh categories, identities and related
factors.
But yeah, um very, very good point. Um So
talking about socio-economic structures, I think there has already
been quite some good work done. And um there
is, there is uh animal model studies but also
correlation studies in humans where uh it has been
shown that um I think Michael Meany, for example,
uh did, did something in this direction and other
colleagues uh also um looked at um what was
the um what's the effect of um growing up
in poverty? And it has been shown that the,
the level of uh some components of the uh
stress axis or stress response axis, like cortisol and
like ac th they are increased very early already
in, in uh you could see a difference um
already in Children of the age of six years
and by the age of 10 years, they have
um the, the, the the le level of cortisol
has already doubled. So I mean, this is really
significant. Um Of course, we might discuss whether this
is just reductionist, but this, in any case, it
is a good indicator. Now, um the other points
you mentioned, of course, they are very uh important.
Like looking at systemic discrimination. We know that um
stress due to hierarchy in other animals um can
be measured by means of cortisol levels. For example,
discrimination due to gender race or other social categories
probably will give the same result. I haven't looked
into that. But I think here at the beginning
of some big societal questions and um this, I
think the scientific journey will eventually take us exactly
in this direction.
Mhm No, a actually that, that bit about hierarchy
and cortisol levels. It reminded me of studies that
Dr Robert Sapolsky did with baboons in baboon societies
where apparently the low, the lower ranking baboons had
higher levels of cortisol, higher levels of stress and
that affected the physiology in many different ways. And
then it talks about an episode where I don't
know exactly why, but for some reason, the higher
ranking baboons were wiped out and then suddenly the
cortisol levels for the others went down and the
society was more peaceful, at least for a while.
So uh yeah, I guess that's uh an example
of that.
And if you think of what uh cortisol does
not only to your organs, so to somatic organs,
but also to your brain that it interferes. I
already said that right, uh it interferes with neuroplasticity.
It uh seemingly has an effect on um the
size of the hippocampus. Um Regina Sullivan's lab showed
that stress components when elevated, had an effect on
the maturation of the Amygdala, so of the Fear
Center. So this is a bit of a uh
pop science term. But you know, um the the
the the the the uh that the the activation
of the Amygdala sets in earlier, which has an
effect on what type of learning happens. So a
shift from preferential to aversion learning. So this has
immense consequences just by looking at a factor like
socio-economic sta status.
So going back to what normal means and the
implications it has for how we think about traits,
um disorders and so on. How should we think
about normal then? I mean, because I guess that
if we are being realistic here, I mean, there
will always be norms in human societies, right? And
there are things that we will always consider normal
or abnormal. But from a scientific perspective, do you
think that we should still think about normal in
any meaningful way or not?
Yeah, that's a difficult question. So um uh maybe
let me answer this from a more practical point
of view. So um there is this, this, this
idea of uh normalcy is kind of dictated or
established by the reference group that give, that is
like the bigger part of the the society does
not even have to be. But uh say, say
this, if, if we, if we follow a bio
static biostatistical approach in the sense of Christopher Bush,
so we have this uh this reference group and
this reference group kind of defines normals. It is
the current situation. Now, what also happens if we,
if we connect it back to what uh we've
discussed earlier about niche construction, it will also be
this kind of dominant group in within the population
that shaped the niche. This is the group that
determine um what sort of environment we will all
be living in. Now, uh in some cases, it
has been shown that when there is a variation
in traits, like maybe in high functional autistic people,
like in uh uh uh in, in uh high
functional uh asper people that they have immensely contributed
to society, to success of say um the virtual
environment and so on. Um This is because they
could pick their niche that seemingly fitted them and
what they seemingly work well adapted to. Ideally, it
would be these people who are neurodivergent, so not
neurotypical, but you know, uh uh that, that could
contribute in saying or in shaping the niche because
they are, they would be better adapted then and
it would be, yeah, it would be much better
uh for them to um to function and to
contribute to society. Uh I know this is a
huge challenge and in some cases with severe psychopathologies,
it might never work. Um But yeah, so, so
this is, this is one of the answers in
I I in practical terms. Uh THE other answer
and coming a little bit more from the conceptual
side now is um so defining uh um what's
normal um has got, I already said that it's
normative as well as this naturalistic uh component. Now,
um if we want to uh combine these two,
then this means that um we will have to
uh have a real um different way of looking
um at, at, at uh at variability, at genetic
variability at um behavioral variability. And I'm not sure
where our society stands there at the moment.
I, I it's actually very interesting that you mentioned
neurodivergent people, for example, people on the autism spectrum
because I, I was actually going to ask you
uh what, what were your thoughts on the neurodiversity
movement? So I if I understand it correctly, you
look at it uh mostly positively, right?
Um Yes, I do, I do. Um IN general.
Um I do because I think um it is
important that um we provide people with uh a
niche where they can flourish, where they, they're nurtured,
where they can develop their potential at the same
time. And here, iii I maybe I've heard a
little bit of a criticism from, from you. Uh
And here uh but I, if I heard the
criticism, I do also agree, we have to be
also careful that um that we do not kind
of um we, we that we, we will have
to accept that uh some symptoms are quite debilitating
so they are very severe
and just act actually. Uh I mean, if there
was some sort of criticism in the way I
expressed my question, it was exactly about that point
because there are, I think good small criticisms of
the neurodiversity movement that perhaps it, they apply mostly
to just a few people and not most people
of the movement where there's a risk of trivializing
people that really suffer severely from certain, for example,
extreme forms of autism and other conditions like that.
Right.
Yeah. Yeah, I agree. I agree. Um, YEAH. So
this is what we would have to be careful
as a society not to, exactly, not to trivialize
it. Um, YEAH. But, uh, in, in general I
think we, as a society we have to be
much more open to, uh, to variability because this
actually might open up completely new niches which we
were not even aware of. So, again, it's about
potential.
Mhm. Right. So I would like to get now
into a trauma and stress, but we've already talked
a little bit about stress, mostly traumatic experiences then.
But before we get into what actually counts as
a traumatic experience, I mean, are there some aspects
of how our memory and emotions work that you
think would be most relevant for people to understand
that would apply to uh traumatic ex or to
how we understand traumatic experiences?
Mhm. So, um uh can I just rephrase it?
So, um you want or the question is how
emotions connect to memory? Is, is this or, or,
or is it, um,
yeah, because I, I mean, I guess that, uh
perhaps uh when we're talking about dramatic experiences and
trying to understand how they work and so on,
uh two very important aspects of our psychology that
play role here are memory and emotion, right? And
uh and basically what I was asking you o
of course, this is a, I guess a very
broad question, but what would you think are perhaps
some of the aspects of how our memory works
and our, and our emotion connects to memory that
then allow for us to have an understanding of
what a traumatic experience is. That, that's my
question. Yeah, I understand. OK. So um so there
is of course, a plethora of um evidence that
emotions are strongly influence memory, especially episodic memory. Why
is that? Because that's uh uh has a lot
to do with emotions and how they um change
our perception per se. Because we um emotions increase
our uh awareness that um our attention to focus
on specific details, um think of accidents or something
where all of a sudden our um uh censor
threshold gets lowered and we remember very, very minute
details about, you know, crashing glass or about um
it looks like it feels like the accident took
much longer, uh like a minute and it, in
reality was only less than a second probably. Uh
And this is because our sensory threshold has, has
been decreased and we are perceiving, perceiving many more
details, smells, sounds um tactile information. So this is
this is this is well known. Um NOW, um
this is evolutionarily important because emotions are kind of
a label that inform us or that kind of
strength and synaptic connections. Um TO tell us this
is an important memory, you should not forget that.
Um AND uh it also emotions also help us
that they guide us through the environment and um
give or facilitate the detection, quick detection of something
that's relevant for our um FFFF for us. Like
um yeah, any, any sort of uh stimuli like
maybe a friend or foe or food or, or
whatever might be relevant now um related to um
why is it that uh in traumatic experiences we
remember um things. So Ooo what, what happens in
traumatic experiences uh on the emotional level? Um So
there, there is a, there is a few things
to unpack here um on, on one hand. So
um see um one thing I've already said is
that uh it um lowers the threshold for sensory
perception. Um And uh stress itself uh has a
um uh uh i it, it stress helps us
to uh process this stimuli um very fast. Um
BECAUSE it um um it takes the um unconscious
route via Amygdala, via uh the hypothalamus and the
uh uh uh and, and the Amygdala. And um
it does not need to um go into um
into the cognitive uh more aware route or the
conscious route. Um And um gives us a very
quick perception of something that um that might be
a threat to us. Um And this unconscious uh
change in our physiology can persist if the stress
level like an acute stress level, like in the
case of um uh developmental trauma, complex trauma, you
know, if there is a prolonged um uh stress
level, then um this prolonged stress level, this um
this this prolonged stress level will have um a
an effect on uh how we detect um stimuli
in the future. So in my book, I write
at some point uh as it changes the stress
axis and it actually change, it changes the whole
physiology. That means uh Children who have been exposed
to this type of trauma very often live in
a relabeled world. Um That means they are in
a constant state of alert where the um where
the the uh synthetic uh nervous system. So the
autonomic nervous system is always in a flight to
fight response. So, um yeah, that, that, that's uh
something. The other thing um that that also is
very typical for um survivors of trauma is that
they have very often intrusive uh hyperemic uh memories.
So, memories that feel as if they are experienced
now in the present with very strong details. And
that is again related to what I said earlier
about this uh uh lowering of the sensory threshold
and remembering many, many of the details. Yeah. And
then there is some of the opposite uh things
which I ha I haven't mentioned uh now and
but just let me say a few words about
that is that in some cases when there is
stress level is extremely high, um people completely forget
the because they cannot integrate um or the the
the memory cannot um be integrated in, in, in
the net in the existing network of, of memories.
So they, it, it's almost as if they forget.
But um this is um yeah, this this happens
especially with very young Children uh before the explicit
memory is fully formed. Uh
A and this also applies to, for example, contexts
of unpredictability and help helplessness like like for example,
low social status, poverty, lack of social support and
contexts like
that. Exactly. Because um especially that the last thing
I said about if it's uh I if it
doesn't, if you don't even have an active explicit
memory about the incident, but you're still suffering from
uh a change in your um in, in, in
your stress axis or in the components of your
stress axis. Then um this uh gives you a
different way of reacting to stimuli for a long
time. It has been believed that uh we must
find high cortisol levels. But um paradoxically, um more
recently, it has been shown that people suffering from
severe long term stress, they adapt their organism to
this extremely high stress level uh by changing the
stress axis and they actually have relatively low um
uh um cortisol. Uh But this happens on the
expense of um and like an allo static load,
that means whenever they experience something that is a
little bit for us would be a neutral stimulus.
But for them, it is a little bit um
exciting or something, then their stress uh uh um
reaction, stress response completely uh a exceeds a normal
response. So this is um yeah. So these, the,
these people who are um uh trauma survivors, especially
for long term, they have really significant change in
the neurophysiology. Mhm A
a and so related to that, there's this common
idea that adversities make Children grow stronger. But is
that really the case? I mean, is there good
enough evidence to support that idea?
Mhm But this is, this is a really important
thing because uh you can uh then use that
um to draw policies and this is kind of
the standard view that you very often read in
management books and so on. Um But these management
books are addressed to, you know, people that um
live in relatively stable environments that are don't come
from traumatic experiences. So, on one hand, um I
want to cite again, you have already mentioned him
today. Uh Robert Sapolsky. On the other hand, I
want to say a few things about my own
work working with um with psychotherapists. So Robert Sapolsky,
he already um pointed out that um if so,
it's um he already pointed out that um if
uh you have uh a high level of stress
then being pushed towards more uncertainty, you know, and
this kind of learning zone and go out and
try to new things. Yeah, this actually um triggers
a whole different stress response than it would be
in other, would trigger in other people. And from
my own experience, I have seen that in um
when working with psychotherapists that um even very neutral
stimuli trigger a whole plethora of reactions that you
could not imagine that you would not see in
a setting with uh other kids, for example. And
that really um makes me um rethink that this
has to be um communicated more widely to policymakers
to people who are working with kids. So yy,
you, you don't push them out to learn something
new to get out of the comfort zone to
um this has to be, has to be done
very, very carefully. Um BECAUSE we're just dealing with
highly vulnerable kids or, or grownups. Yeah. So this
stays long into adulthood, maybe your whole life.
Yeah. And later we're going to get into resilience
and how people develop it and what it means
exactly. But just before that, I would like to
ask you a little bit about attachment theory because
it seems that the people we develop relationships with
in early life and uh whoever they might be
and we're going to talk about that those relationships
seems to uh seem to be very important. And
then I also want to ask you, of course,
if attachment, the, the attachment style one develops in
childhood and so on is fixed or not, we're
going to get into that. But I mean, what
role do you think that attachment theory plays in
this context? Of trying to uh I mean, in
the broader context of developmental psychology.
But first of all, I think as humans, we
are uh a hyper selfie species. So attachment is
not only something that is um evolutionary um put
down in our uh biology. So we're actively uh
we need because we're uh the species that is
born relatively early um in as compared to other
primates with a relatively uh very uh immature brain
where there is a lot uh uh still to
develop, that means we're helpless. We need the um
support of caregivers. And of course, um attachment theory,
this is uh this goes back to John Bowie
and Marie AINS was in the, in the 19
fifties. So, um there has been a lot of
amendments made to, to this theory but the key
principles or the key messages uh still remain true.
So, um we need um care give us otherwise
we could not, uh we could not develop if
we are severely neglected. If we um if there
is nobody looking after us after us as a
child, this um triggers an immense stress in us.
Children cannot regulate stress by themselves. They can uh
upregulate the cortisol levels, but what they cannot regulate,
they cannot down regulate yet by themselves. So they
need to be down regulated. Stress needs to be
down regulated from the um um caregiver externally. So,
you know, uh body contact Oxytocin. Oxytocin is a
wonderful uh antagonist to, to, to uh co so,
so this is what all this attachment is is
for because um we need in order to survive
um a newborn and AAA an infant needs a
connection to, to a caregiver. Um Now, this is
something that was very controversial about uh yeah, 70
years ago, maybe even 6050 years ago. Um I
think everybody accepts that now. So this is not,
this is no longer controversial. However, what you already
mentioned is that this is a developmental process. And
the question is, is this fixed or what, what
happens in adulthood? And basically, this is not so
easy to answer. First of all, um it is,
it is a developmental process and it also is
um split in different phases. So we have like
an early pro phase, we have a um then
the this preference learning phase, then we have this
aversion uh learn phase um that goes along with
neuro anatomical changes. So, aversion learning for example, sets
in when the maturation of the Amygdala happens. So
about the age of 7 to 8 months in
humans uh in other in chimpanzees about four months
and so on. So um you can see, but
then there is a partner correcting phase at the
age of, you know, three years or something. When
people, when Children start to begin to develop the
theory of mind. And then what you said is,
yeah, we have an attachment style. This is something
how we, we observe that we, we experience it.
This is how we expect that people act in
a partnership with us. However, uh if you have
a um a lot of positive experience with secondary
caregiver, secondary attachment persons and that can even be
your teacher or your, I don't know, coach, uh
sports coach or whatever. Um EVEN then there is
good potential that you, at least with some attachment
stars, maybe not with the disorganized, but with uh
the other uh uh two attachment stars um that
you can balance out and you can improve and
get a secure attachment in a partnership play later
on in life. Mhm.
Oh, ok. So I, I have two kinds of
questions here. Uh First of all, um when it
comes to the primary caregiver or caregivers, does it
really matter who they are? I mean, does it
necessarily need to be the mother or the father
or even someone from the brother family or can
it be really anyone as long as we develop
uh ki uh a secure kind of attachment to
them?
Yeah. Um Yeah, you, you actually um really pinpointed
towards one of the weaknesses of the original, of
the traditional um attachment theory as formulated by Bowie
because he basically just looked at the diad bond
between mother and child.
Yeah. And I, and I mean, to be fair
back then, uh perhaps we didn't have enough anthropology
to know that we are co-operative breeders and he
was starting from a point of uh evolutionary theory,
right? He was very influenced by evolutionary theory. And
back then, we fought mostly about uh females as
the primary and perhaps only caregivers, right? So just
to be fair.
Yeah, you're right. However, and here I have to
contradict a little bit from his own biography. Uh
John Bobby should have known that it's not necessarily
the mother because his attachment figure. And that was
actually the reason why he started to um venture
into this field. His primary um attachment figure was
actually his uh child carer called I think Minnie.
So the first four years of his life, um
you know, he was in coming from a rich
family. So it was not the mother actually being
the caregiver looking after him, it was actually an
ow parent, somebody else who took this role. Now,
what you said is absolutely correct. So um does
it need to be the mother at that point
we did not have um or the the there
was not enough knowledge from anthropology studies. Um EVEN
he kind of uh bo we also excluded fathers.
But now we know that that uh father can
be as good as an attachment figure as the
as mother, in terms of stress regulation, in terms
of bonding, you know, even uh oxytocin release is
it has been shown measured by, by fathers or
not just fathers, but by a male caregiver. Let
me just be neutral there now, um, as you
said already, um So what about now with the
new information we have from, um, from anthropology studies?
So, actually, interestingly there is um some uh populations,
these are, which is still hunter gatherers. Um And
there it has been shown that the very young
Children uh have many primary caregivers up to, I
don't know, 18 or something. And, um, and these
all can function as, um, there um with them,
they also develop very strong attachment bonds. And interestingly,
these uh Children also show much lower um stranger
anxieties at this, you know, age of 7 to
8 months. So, yeah. So it, no, it doesn't
have to be the mother. It has to be
somebody who provides safety nurturing um stress relief, uh
regulation. Yeah. Mhm
OK. So the, the second kind of question I
had here was OK. So it's basically a two
part question. So the first part is ju just
to make this point clear uh attachment styles later
later on in life, apply to basically any kind
of social relationship, right to friendships, to romantic relationships
and so on or not.
Basically, yes. But the closer uh the friendship and
usually partnership, um the more relevant it is. So
with just normal distant friends or at work, you
can adjust very well. But the closer it gets
emotionally because this you have this so called inner
working model that kind of triggers your emotional model
that that you've learned in childhood. Yeah.
A and when it comes to that bit, we
mentioned about attachment styles potentially changing across the lifespan.
I, I mean, it just came to my mind,
I don't know if there's any specific research on
this, but it just came to my mind if
we should also perhaps think about attachment style as
we did back when we talked about dynamical systems
theory and other psychological traits. I mean, could it
be the case that I don't know in, in
particular periods of our life? Because we might experience,
I don't know particular kinds of friendships or romantic
relationships. Even if we, we grew up being securely
attached, then we might become circumstantially more anxiously attached,
more violent or the opposite.
Yep. Um So, so the, the opposite becoming more
securely attached because of positive um uh input from
on relationships as adults that has been relatively uh
well documented also the opposite. Um I have seen
and I have um very interesting as I've, I
very recently um was part in a, in a
session with a um with a therapist. Um WHERE,
where this was really interesting to, to, to see
also, you know, to go a little bit away
from the Ivory tower and from the theoretical research
and, and look into how it is plays out
in real life and, and where you could really
um follow and monitor what happened there. So yes,
also if you have um experienced a secure um
attachment style and you've developed a uh in a
model of a secure attachment style because of uh
safe and um your needs were well met, emotional
needs were well met, met in childhood. But then
growing up, especially in um in adolescence where you
have a very strong reorganization of your um neuroplastic
neuro organization of your brain. Um Then you again,
um uh if you're there exposed to um severe
disappointments, actually, this can cause um a change in,
in, in the attachment style. Yeah, that not of
course, not, not uh to, to your primary caregivers,
but then to how you interact with further with
other partners. Yeah,
or a a actually that last point that you
mentioned there is it possible for us to have
different kinds of attachment styles with different people that
treat us differently?
That is interesting. That is interesting and that was
by no means um covered in the original um
attachment theory. However, there is more and more evidence
point in this direction. Yes. Um And this is
especially fostered if you have grow if you grew,
grew up in a family when you had several
siblings, because there you developed kind of different kind
of models um di mo models with different people.
So yes, but it's, it's also true because you
can have different attachment style to your father and
your to your mother. So even there, you can
can can also have it. And Um So, so,
yeah. Yeah. Yeah, this is, this is more recent
study as far as I know, but uh very
interesting. Yeah.
OK. So, uh I would like to go through
resilience now and then after resilience, I have just
one last general question to ask you. But what
is resilience then? What does it mean? Psychologically speaking
to be a resilient person? And I, we develop
resilience since we've already talked about uh attachment styles,
for example, and living in unpredictable and helpless environments
and the effects that that has on our psychology.
So how do we develop resilience?
Very good. Yeah. Um ACTUALLY, probably the most important
question and in my book, I unfortunately, really only
dedicate the last bit to it um because that
was not the main focus, but uh I think
this is something that needs to be developed much
more. So what is resilience resilience is in the
face of advertises uh it uh you can overcome
these negative uh these negative uh experiences and uh
you can still grow actually, it's even more than
that, you cannot only overcome but you, you get
even stronger. So, um and this um research has
originally started um by Emy Vanna and she looked
at um Children in uh at the Hawaiian Island
of Kawai. And um many of these Children grew
up in, in, in really severe poverty. And um
a lot of these Children later in life in
their teenage years and later in life, then I
had destructive or self destructive behavior and ended up
being alcoholics or um committing suicide or having very
unstable partnerships and so on. However, really surprising it
was in the same population under very, very similar,
if not the same circumstances about a third of
these Children uh did not develop these destructive behaviors.
So they were kind of resilient. They developed, they
succeeded in life, they flourished. They actually, despite all
these adversaries, they, they grew stronger and they um
yeah, they, they were on top of their lives.
Now, what she found out and that has been
confirmed by many other studies is um these Children
who did not um go into this self destructive
or destructive pathway. Uh WERE those who had um
at least one person who cared for them and
it does did not even have to be the
primary caregiver like the mother or the father. It
was in some cases, it was a teacher or
something and this caring person kind of counterbalance, then
all these adversaries including missing parental bonds and alcoholism
and drugs and poverty and so on. So um
yeah, that, that uh yeah, that, that, that was
I think kind of this is what was when
this resilient research was born. And now obviously this
is a really powerful message because that means that
at least one caring person, her child um should
help a child to develop uh into a um
an adult that uh can master his or her
life. Now, in some cases, this is, this is
not easily possible. There is the caregivers are missing.
So you asked me, so what, what are the
factors? So how can we contribute um to, to
making Children more resilient? And here I draw from
um insights that come actually ff from uh a
few insights um but amongst others um that come
from, from the so called circle of courage that
was developed by um the Indi Indi indigenous population
of um Northern America. They um showed that some
of the uh the um important key factors that
they need or elements that they need to support
Children to, to grow and to, to develop healthily
that are actually um can that, that are going
across cultures. So that's holds true for all, all,
all cultures. And the first thing you need is
to establish uh secure a safe environment. So this
before you do any other interventions, this the first
thing is the child has to be safe, take
him her out of the unsafe environment, provide an
environment where he or she feels safe. And then
the other four points come from the uh circle
of courage. And the first one is um establish
an emotional bond. So make sure that there is
a sense of belonging. This is the first one.
The second one is um they call it mastery,
put some challenge, but only those challenges that can
realistically be mastered by the child, you know. Um
So, so I think um Levitsky would call this
the zone of proximal development, help the child, but
make sure it's possible for the child to master
it. So um offering learning increasingly complex tasks for
learning. So this is the second one, the third
one, shift the power to the learner. So provide
him or her with agency self actualization, give the
faith into his or her hand. Um And the
last thing is, and this is something that I
feel that society is missing more and more of
it is that build a relationship of reciprocity. That
means altruism, that means empathy, make sure that the
child understands um that for whatever he or she
gives he or she gets things in return in
a very positive way. So these, these are kind
of the, the the the the four points of
the circle of courage and the sa safety part.
So this is kind of um yeah, what I
I think that the most important takeaway messages from
how to build resilience.
OK. So one more question about resilience then because
you were talking mostly if I understood it correctly,
mostly about Children there. But what if the person
is already an adult and they have gun through
an entire childhood and life of trauma? Do you
think that perhaps there might be cases where unfortunately
it's already too late to help uh those people?
Yeah. So I mean, I would never ever uh
say it's too late because I think nobody deserves
that. Everybody needs um people who believe in them
and who support them. However, um I have investigated,
looked and also um I in, in, from practical
examples which I've seen, there are some cases which
would require an immense effort and very often um
people do not believe anymore that this is possible.
So, and then you have the, the, the, the
first step is not even initiated because if you
are already working with a client or if um
a grown up thinks that there is no chance
for him or her for happiness, for partnership or
something because of severe um trauma experienced. Um And
in my book, I give a few historical examples.
Um ONE from the uh Canadian um uh Children,
the Du Plessis uh Children who, who grew up
in these orphanages in Canada. Um If you don't
give yourself a chance, then I think it's difficult
because in the end, it must come from uh
your own willingness to um to become resilient, to
flourish to, to um yeah, to shape your future.
Mhm So uh I would like to ask you
uh just to wrap up the interview, a final
question about uh a, a broad topic of your
book that is actually something that you introduce the
book with. And I think that we have already
at least several times mentioned or referenced it indirectly
during our conversation. But when it comes to the
study of human psychology, specifically, what do you think
it's important for people to keep in mind about
how science works and how it is done? Because
of course, we've talked here about several different paradigms
and disciplines. We've talked about behavior, genetics, developmental psychology,
neuroscience, uh uh and, and particular kinds of paradigms
like dynamical systems theory and its counterparts. So, w
what do you think uh would be important for
people to keep in mind when they are working
through the lens of a particular paradigm in science
that perhaps might be bounded, that is usually bounded
by particular axioms, methodological presuppositions, techniques, concepts, and so
on.
Mhm um Well, first of all, let me just
pick up on something you already said is I
think when we talk about studying the human minds,
then uh this is such a complex task that
this requires anyway, an interdisciplinary endeavor. So there is
no chance that any discipline has the privilege over
another discipline to elucidate the more important mechanisms or
more important processes. So I really think and that
needs to be fostered that there is a collaboration
between scholars from the natural sciences, social sciences and
humanities. So, and that also should sink into the
brains of the natural scientists. II, I said it
on purpose now um to, to your question about
um what do we have to keep in mind
when we talk about how, how the science work
as such. So one of the things in here
I speak from the point of view of a
natural scientists. So as a researcher, you always want
to be really objective, you want to avoid, you
said it looking through the lens of some paradigms,
you want to avoid that you're uh affected by
some I don't know, spurious cases, anecdotal evidences uh
or you want to avoid to become overly attached
to certain theory because this is something you have
found or uh because then you will be less
open to critique to this proof, to counterfactual. Now,
um since I've been uh here at the Conrad
Lawrence Institute uh for Evolution and cognition research, we
were highly inter disciplinary institution um where natural scientists
uh people from the humanities, especially philosophers and historians
of science work together. And um the longer I've
been here, the more I've discussed with people, the
more obvious it is to me that true objectivity
in science is really a naive idea. Yeah. So
you already pointed that out. So this is you,
we are, our research is always somehow bounded by
some axioms. Um And it is kind of rooted
very often also in, in a certain zeitgeist. So
we're following what's popular at the moment. Um No,
I think we agree here. Science here is needed
almost ex is not totally exact, not always correct.
Certainly, it's not objective, it's not unbiased. Yeah, this
is very surprising to a layperson even maybe even
surprising to young researchers, young scientists. Yeah, we have
this really idealistic idea. Yeah. So I think we,
we the two of us agree on that now
as also many scientists, most scientists will probably agree
to that. However, I think they will not admit
that uh very openly. Uh ALTHOUGH they know that
um the research is based on who is doing
actually that the, the, the experiment um which methodology
is used, which expe uh instruments are used now.
But if I don't admit to that, then um
this is maybe a, a self defense mechanism because
then uh you do not further um kind of
uh uh uh challenge or you do not um
uh ignite further distrust uh of the public in
science because we, we want the public to trust
us. But I, for my part, I see that
in a really different way. I think one of
the most important endeavors of research is to grapple
exactly with these issues, to look at the reality
of scientific constructs to see. Um WHAT is this
demarcation? Where is science? And, and what, what is
pseudoscience? For example, what are the problems with inductive
inferences? Yeah. Can I um or how can I
establish whether um I there there are some systematic
bias in my research um that may distort them
the research processes. So, um I think all these
things have to be addressed, they must be addressed
otherwise we end up uh running into the problem
that uh were no longer trustworthy. And after all,
I think uh science is always or doing research
is always a process of the best approximation where
we very often take wrong tracks along the way.
And very only occasionally we have a few breakthroughs.
So I think we really need to continuously challenge
our own views and uh we have to question
our pet hypothesis, although we might have grown fond
of it. And um this would be the only
way how to make genuine advancements towards an understanding
how the human mind works.
Mhm Yeah. A and by the way, if I
may and, and if you disagree with something, I'm
about to say, please uh tell me. But I,
if I may add, I just wanted to say
that I guess we have to keep in mind
that science is uh human institution. It's done by
humans, the scientific method or methods themselves are ever
evolving because as we develop new techniques, as we,
we uh discover new theoretical developments and so on
the way science is done now is not the
way it was done 100 years ago and 100
years from now, it will be completely different for
sure. And also I guess that there's a very
simple idea or at least you can put it
in simple terms, but it's more complex than it
seems that many people who are science communicators are
always uh s uh telling people about there is
and that uh there's no definitive truth in science,
truth is ever evolving. But sometimes curiously enough, uh,
scientists and people who are interested in science like
myself, uh uh I mean, sometimes we, uh we
are tempted to treat certain discoveries in science like
dogmas. And, uh curiously enough, uh, there are debates
sometimes between scientists and religious people and they are
always telling the religious person, oh, you shouldn't trust
what the Bible says because that's dogma, that's just
a book and so on. And so for then
when it comes to some of their own pet
hypothesis theories and so on, interestingly, it seems that
they are treating them like dogma like the religious
people do, which is also interesting because that makes
us closer perhaps to certain pseudo scientists or anti
scientists. Then we would like to admit at least
in certain cases because we are all human anyways.
But I mean, I guess that's what I would
like to add what you said.
I fully agree to it.
Ok. So Doctor Sarto Jackson, uh the book again
is the making and breaking of minds how social
interactions shape the human mind. I'm of course, leaving
a link with the description box of the interview.
And would you like just to tell people before
we go where they can find you on the
internet?
Yes. So, uh first of all, thank you very
much for giving me the opportunity. It was a
real pleasure. So, um I, I really enjoy it
um Exchanging with you because I think we very
much think along the similar lines. Um SO great.
And I'm, I, I'm also a fan uh of
um uh of your podcasts. And um so I've,
I've already looked at many of them, so II
I might have to watch myself as well. I'm
not sure if I want to do that. Um
So how do you find me? Um You find
me on the website of the Conrad Lawrence Institute
for Evolution and Cognition research, the Kli, I have
a Twitter account um as uh Jackson Sato is
my Twitter handle. Um uh I'll if I've been
linked in and um I, I'm very happy if
you get in contact with me via email and
that is my name Isabella dot Sarto um minus
Jackson at KL I dot AC A T. Thank
you very much.
OK. So look, thank you so much again for
taking the time to come on the show. I
love the book and I loved even more our
conversation today. It's been an immense pleasure and I
just hope to have you again on the show
somewhere in the future to talk about other topics.
This has been a real, a really fun interview.
Thank you so much.
Thank you very much. Take care all the best.
Hi guys. Thank you for watching this interview. Until
the end. If you liked it, please share it.
Leave a like and hit the subscription button. The
show is brought to you by N Lights learning
and development. Then differently check the website at N
lights.com and also please consider supporting the show on
Patreon or paypal. I would also like to give
a huge thank you to my main patrons and
paypal supporters, Perego Larson, Jerry Muller and Frederick Suno,
Bernard Seche O of Alex Adam, Castle Matthew Whitting
Bear. No wolf, Tim Ho Erica LJ Connors Philip
Forrest Connelly. Then the Met Robert Wine in NAI
Z Mar Nevs calling in Hobel Governor Mikel Stormer
Samuel Andre Francis for Agns Ferger Ken Hall, her
ma J and Lain Jung Y and the Samuel
K Hes Mark Smith J. Tom Hummel s friends,
David Sloan Wilson, ya des Roman Roach Diego, Jan
Punter Romani Charlotte Bli Nicole Barba, Adam Hunt Pavlo
Stassi na me, Gary G. Alman Sam of Zal
Ari and YPJ Barboza Julian Price Edward Hall, Eden
Broder Douglas Fry Franca Lati Gilon Cortez or Solis
Scott Zachary ftdw Daniel Friedman, William Buckner, Paul Giorgio,
Luke Loki, Georgio Theophano, Chris Williams and Peter Wo
David Williams Di A Costa Anton Erickson Charles Murray,
Alex Shaw, Marie Martinez, Coralie Chevalier, Bangalore Fists Larry
Dey Junior, Old Ebon Starry Michael Bailey then Spur
by Robert Grassy Zorn, Jeff mcmahon, Jake Zul Barnabas
Radick Mark Temple, Thomas Dvor Luke Neeson Chris Tory
Kimberly Johnson, Benjamin Gilbert Jessica. No week in the
B brand Nicholas Carlson Ismael Bensley. Man George Katis
Valentine Steinman, Perlis, Kate Van Goler, Alexander Abert Liam
Dan Biar Masoud Ali Mohammadi. Perpendicular Jer Urla. Good
enough, Gregory Hastings David Pins of Sean Nelson, Mike
Levin and Jos Net. A special thanks to my
producers is our web, Jim Frank Lucani. Tom Vig
and Bernard N Cortes Dixon, Bendik Muller Thomas Rumble,
Catherine and Patrick Tobin, John Carl, Negro, Nick Ortiz
and Nick Golden. And to my executive producers, Matthew
Lavender, Si Adrian Bogdan Knit and Rosie. Thank you
for all.